---
layout: lesson
title: Manipulating strings
unit: io
order: 3
feature-img: "assets/img/gradients/blue.png"
toc: true
---

# Manipulating strings

## Validating user input

When the input stream comes from a user, we cannot guarantee that they will enter the data exactly as prompted. In practice, your program must validate or manipulate user input to meet certain requirements. Otherwise, your program may run into unexpected behavior.

Some common manipulations you may need to make to input data include:

- Changing the case of text
- Splitting data by a delimiter
- Ensuring that the input contains some data
- Truncating long data

To remain short, many example code blocks in future units will not show the process of validating standard input. Now you learn about string methods that can be used to validate and manipulate all kinds of strings.

## Strings are immutable

Strings are immutable, which means a string value cannot be changed. The variable can be reassigned, but the value of the string itself cannot be modified. Methods called on strings return new string values.

## Changing the case of a string

You can change the case of an entire string or individual characters.

**Code**

```python
spongebob_case = 'i LikE cAkE'
# get a lowercase version of the string
a = spongebob_case.lower()
# get an uppercase version of the string
b = spongebob_case.upper()
# print the current values of all three variables
print(spongebob_case)
print(a)
print(b)
```

**Output**

```
i LikE cAkE
i like cake
I LIKE CAKE
```

Notice that even after the `str.lower()` and `str.upper()` methods are called, the value of `spongebob_case` remains the same.

Many programs that work with strings forget to take case into account when checking their values.

To compare strings in a case-insensitive manner, use the `str.casefold()` method. In addition to producing a string in lowercase, it converts foreign characters like `ß` to a common set.

```python
word_a = 'IMPASSE'
word_b = 'impaßee'
comparision0 = word_a.lower() == word_b.lower()
# comparision0 = False
comparision1 = word_a.casefold() == word_b.casefold()
# comparision1 = True
```

## Selecting substrings with slices

Slicing is a powerful way of extracting **substrings**, smaller strings, from a string value.

The syntax for a slice looks like this:

```python
str[start:stop:step]
```

Where `str` is the string, `start` is an integer for the starting position, `end` is an integer for the ending position (both inclusive), and `step` is the step size for the slice. The position numbers are optional.

```python
message = 'Come meet me at the auditorium.'
message[20:]        # 'auditorium.'
message[20:30]      # 'auditorium'
message[20:30:2]    # 'adtru'
message[20::2]      # 'adtru.'
message[:10]        # 'Come meet '
```

Even though the square bracket and colon `str[::]` syntax of slices looks different from the dot operator, method, and parameter `str.format(a, b)` syntax you will see on other string methods, slices **do not** modify the string they act on. Slices also return a new string.

## Splitting strings on a character

Strings can contain a lot of useful data, often separated by specific **delimiter** characters. The `str.split()` method breaks up a string into a `list` of strings, using a given parameter as the separator.

**Code**

```python
todays_date = '6/1/2018'
parts = todays_date.split('/')
# parts = ['6', '1', '2016']
print('Month: {}, Day: {}, Year: {}'.format(parts[0], parts[1], parts[2]))
```

Notice that the delimiter character is not preserved in the resulting list of strings.

Other common delimiters you may have seen in your life include: comma-separated value files (.csv), tab delimeters, dash delimeters, newline delimiters, and many more.

**Output**

```
Month: 6, Day: 1, Year: 2018
```

## Checking if a string contains a substring

To check if a substring is part of a string, you can use the `in` operator. This operation results in a boolean value: `True` if the substring is found, `False` otherwise.

```python
title = 'The Sorcerer\'s Bone'
found_it = 'Sorcerer' in title
# found_it = True
```

You can also search for the position of a substring with the `str.find()` method. The first argument is the substring to search for. The result will an integer representing the **left-most** position of the substring: the first occurrence from the left.

If the substring is not found, the result will be `-1`.

```python
title = 'The Sorcerer\'s Bone'
idx1 = title.index('er')
# idx1 = 8
idx2 = title.index('v')
# idx2 = -1
```

You can also supply additional arguments for the search:

**str.find(substr, beg=0, end=len(str))**

- `beg` is an integer for the beginning position of the search (inclusive), default = `0`
- `end` is an integer for the ending position of the search (exclusive), default = `len(str)`

```python
title = 'The Sorcerer\'s Bone'
idx1 = title.index('er')
# idx1 = 8
# if not named, the paramaters are evaluate in this order: substr, beg, end
# if an `end` argument is not given, the search goes to the end of the string
idx2 = title.index('er', idx1 + 1)
# idx2 = 10
```

## Replacing substrings

To replace all occurrences of one substring with another substring, use the `str.replace()` method.

```python
my_desserts = 'I like chocolate ice cream, strawberry ice cream, and banana ice cream.'
your_desserts = my_desserts.replace('ice cream', 'cake')
# your_desserts = 'I like chocolate cake, strawberry cake, and banana cake.'
```

## Reversing a string

So far all the methods we have looked at for manipulating strings are built-in. You would think there is something like this for reversing strings, right?

**Code**

```python
name = 'Shelly'
print(name.reverse())
```

**Output**

```
  File "filename.py", line 1,
AttributeError: 'str' object has no attribute 'reverse'
```

Sike. There is no built-in `string.reverse()` method. What is a programmer to do?

You could write your own method. Alternative, you could use one of these approaches:

```python
# slice the characters of the string, but incrementing by -1 to go backwards
rev1 = name[::-1]
# rev1 = 'yllehS'
# turn the string into a reversed list and then rejoin them
rev2 = ''.join(reversed(name))
# rev2 = 'yllehS'
```

Want to know more about why there isn't a built-in `string.reverse()` method? Check out [this StackOverflow post.](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/931092/reverse-a-string-in-python)
